---
# Documentation: https://wowchemy.com/docs/managing-content/

title: "Pocket Operators"
summary: "Experiments with my collection of Pocket Operators"
authors: []
tags: ["music"]
categories: []
date: 2021-03-10T11:56:51-08:00
draft: true

# Optional external URL for project (replaces project detail page).
external_link: ""

# Featured image
# To use, add an image named `featured.jpg/png` to your page's folder.
# Focal points: Smart, Center, TopLeft, Top, TopRight, Left, Right, BottomLeft, Bottom, BottomRight.
image:
  caption: ""
  focal_point: ""
  preview_only: false

# Custom links (optional).
#   Uncomment and edit lines below to show custom links.
# links:
# - name: Follow
#   url: https://twitter.com
#   icon_pack: fab
#   icon: twitter

url_code: ""
url_pdf: ""
url_slides: ""
url_video: ""

# Slides (optional).
#   Associate this project with Markdown slides.
#   Simply enter your slide deck's filename without extension.
#   E.g. `slides = "example-slides"` references `content/slides/example-slides.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `slides = ""`.
slides: ""
---


## Why

I really like the quick and simplicity of Pocket Operators. They are so simple to operate at first, until you start
experimenting and before you know it, your way down the rabbit hole after taking the red pill. Here are some
of my favorite things about each operator.

## Basic Overview

There is no off/off switch. They are just on when you insert the 2xAAA batteries. They do have an auto power off
after 5 min of no activity and are supposed to have battery life for about 1 year. They all have a clock and alarm
clock if you want to wake up to some patterns at a certain time. There is an input and an output
audio ports for piping information. The left side allows for sending sync information from other devides. The right
side allows for listening to the output of the sounds generated by the pocket operator and as a passthrough for
operators sending their outputs.

There are basically two types of interfaces for all operators: Knobs and Buttons.

### Knobs

They are great for setting values of different effects. Some operators are able to record the change which
make for very unique songs and patterns. Others change pitch, tempo, or other things depending on the type of
operator.

### Buttons

They are broken up into these main groups:

1. tools
   - sounds
   - patterns
   - bpm
1. modes
   - recording
   - fx
   - play/pause
   - edit/perform
1. numbers
   - sound samples
   - effects
   - patterns

Again, it really comes down to which operator you are using, but these do not change that much (based on the
3 operators I own right now)

## Pocket Operators as gifts

If you ever think about buying a Pocket Operator as a gift for your friend/family member, first ask them
if they own any currently. Then I would go by this ranking of priority to get first:

1. PO-33 Knock-Out
   - Allows the operator to play around with high quality sound clips (relative to other Pocket Operators).
   - Has a mic for capturing sound clips
   - Allows for trimming the sound clip start and stop
   - Best quality of recording sound clips as they are not down-sampled
   - Cannot play samples simultaneously
1. PO-12 Rhythm
   - As the name suggests its focus is on rhythm
   - Can play multiple sounds at once

## Overall Techniques

1. Use many patterns and build from a drum first.
1. Copy to the next pattern to build the next bar of your song.
1. Playing patterns in a sequence helps build a song.
1. You can record almost any fx, isolation, or transition of a knob during performance (this helps finalize some fun)
1. Backing up your PO is simple, just have to lookup in the manual how to do it

## Manuals

### PO-12

[PO-12 rhythm Manual](https://teenage.engineering/guides/po-12/en)

### PO-33

[PO-33 K.O. Manual](https://teenage.engineering/guides/po-33/en)

### PO-32

[PO-32 tonic manual](https://teenage.engineering/guides/po-32/en)
